The lines are not essential. I ask you how an
interest came in chemical engineering that led to
oceanography.
Okay. I was interested in chemical engineering
even before I started the college after World War
II. So I went immediately from the Navy to two years
of science courses at Compton Junior College,
then spent a semester at Fullerton Junior
College, and then went to New Mexico A&M, where I
decided to major in chemical engineering.
I graduated from A&M in 1950, and this was at kind of
a little depression in which there weren't a lot of
company representatives out scouting for
chemical engineers to go to work for their
companies. The reason I had gone to New Mexico to
begin with was because a high school friend of
mine, Art Maxwell,
had gone there and recommended it. Then
When he left New Mexico, and he graduated a year
earlier than I did in physics, he went to Scripps
to do some graduate work. And he had told me how good
it was. And so I decided to try to apply my chemical
engineering background, combined with the
oceans, to extracting chemicals from the sea and,
in general, working with chemistry of the oceans.
So I went there in 1950,
spent a year taking the required courses and
working half time. Then because Norris
Rakestraw, who was chairman of the chemistry
department at that time, required all of his
chemical people to go to UCLA for a year. I went up to
UCLA and did a year of graduate chemistry up there,
then came back to Scripps, took some more courses,
and got involved in working almost full-time. So I
got diverted from getting my Ph.D. I saw that you
had not finished your thesis but had done all the
work leading to your thesis. Now were you diverted
then working at Scripps because you were very
active then in testing and chemical engineering
at that particular time. Were you working out of
Scripps? No, I was working at Scripps at the time. I
was doing some research with Ted Folsom which
involved trying to do extraction of chemical
compounds at low temperatures out of the
seawater, particularly looking at the organic
problem. And so I built a vacuum evaporator and
used it in a series of small experiments. We're in
good shape. Now, what I don't understand is, did
your time in the Navy have any effect upon your
decision to enter oceanography or chemical
engineering? I don't think so. Okay. What did you
do while you were in the Navy? I was a machinist
mate, enlisted man, spent the entire, after the
first year of training, the entire time on an LSD in
the South Pacific. It seemed to me like that would
dampen the enthusiasm for oceanography.
When did they send you to UCLA? Was that the general
policy at Scripps at that time, to do a year study
away from the institution in the hard sciences, so
to speak? It was Raichstraw's policy, because
Scripps was, there was no UCSD at that time.
Scripps was a little campus down there all by
itself, and he felt that chemical oceanographers
should have a stronger grounding in chemistry
that he could give them at Scripps. So he required
them all to go spend a year at UCLA in the chemistry
department. Who else was at Scripps while you were
there who might have had some influence on you?
Warren Wooster was there. I worked for Warren from
the day I went there. John Isaac. I worked for Ted
Folsom and John Isaac for some time. Ed Goldberg.
Does there seem to be any lead from Scripps to
O.N.R.? Yeah, Howard Maxwell.
Okay. Now, what had happened was that both Art and I
got involved in looking at the fallout of fission
products from nuclear testing in the South
Pacific. And he had...
participated in, I think, the 54 series of tests.
And he got disinterested
in it. And Gordon Little came to Scripps and talked
him into going to Washington about 1955 or
something like that. Maybe it was 56, 55.
Meanwhile, I was not working for Art at Scripps. I
was working for with Folsom and Isaacs. And in the
56 series of tests, after Art had gone, then I sort
of took over the responsibility for that part of
the testing that both he and Ted Folsom had been
doing earlier in organizing and this sort of
thing. So I stayed until 1958. And Vedder left. O&R
at that time, and Maxwell asked me if I'd like to
come and go to work for O&R. And I could see I wasn't
going to get to work on my PhD, not because they
wouldn't let me, but because of my own interests.
So I decided to go join Art in Washington and work
for O&R. Now, before we move into such things as
Washington experiences. I only have a couple of
more questions I would like to ask. What exactly
sorts of tests were you running on radioactive
fallout?
Well, the key question that was being asked was how
much of the fission products from a given bomb test
go into the stratosphere and how much of it come
down locally. They couldn't measure what went
into the stratosphere, but there was some hope
that they could measure how much of it came down as
local fallout. And so we spent a lot of time
building instruments to tow behind the ship,
trying to map the aerial extent of the fallout and
the depths to which it had penetrated, and trying
to do a mass balance back to the bomb test. And so it
was instrument development, data reduction,
writing reports for Sandy on the results, and most
of it was classified, secret. Now then, after this
series of experiments then,
Off you go to Washington. And exactly what
prompted the change from academic to managerial
life then seems to be a feeling you prefer not to
finish a PhD thesis. Then when you come to work for
ONR, what exactly do you do?
Well, I went to work in the geophysics branch. And
at that time, it was being run by Gordon Lill, who He
was a geologist himself. And Maxwell, who was
responsible for oceanography. And it had an
atmospheric arm, Jim Hughes, and a solid earth
geology program under, I
can't think of his name now. But anyway, I
essentially went there to help Art manage the
program, their research program at the academic
institution. And the first thing I did with Art and
Gordon was to write a 10-year plan for the Navy's
program in oceanographic research called TENOC,
and that document was used by the Navy as a planning
document for expanding oceanography in the U.S.
What sort of research did you seek to aid while you
were at O.N. Art?
Were you mission-oriented or war-oriented or
hard science-oriented? Well, in 1958, when I went
there, and for the early part of the 60s, it was our
conviction and the conviction of the people at
ONR, Chief of Naval Research and others, that just
about any research that you do on the oceans is
going to help the Navy since that's the Navy's
operating environment. So we were
essentially... While we had a mission
orientation, the composition of the research
program that we supported wasn't restricted in
any way. It was all unclassified, all basic, and
not restricted to one discipline or another. It
wasn't until Mansfield Amendment of 1966
or something like that that the Navy became
concerned about the orientation of its,
particularly ONR, the orientation of its basic
research program. But even then, we didn't, I
don't think we had to lop off 5% of what we were
supporting. It was still justifiable, highly
justifiable under the Navy's banner.
Did you try to create academic departments in
academe as departments of oceanography in this
period? Yes, we did. There were
five institutions in 1958. Scripps, Woods Hole,
University of Washington, Texas A&M, and Miami.
And I guess Lamont was there, but we weren't
supporting it. And what we said in Tannock was that
there was not enough oceanographic capability in
the country to satisfy the Navy's needs for basic
research in this area, and that we should build
laboratories using ONR funds. Not, yes, build
them, but help the people build them. So Wayne Burt
went to Oregon State University, and we supported
him. in building up his capability,
supplied him with a ship from the Navy's funds,
supported his research program as it expanded.
John Knauss went to the University of Rhode
Island. O&R supported the buildup of his program,
made available
the funds to convert one of the FS class research
vessels.
We had also, in that 10-year plan, planned to
expand the existing institutions at a rate of
about 10% a year for 10 years. And we had a
shipbuilding program to go with it. And we made
ships available to Lamont, Scripps, Miami,
Woods Hole. And we built some buildings. We built
the building at the Johns Hopkins University the
Chesapeake Bay Institute, primarily with ONR
funds, under amortization. They build it, and
then we let them amortize the cost over 10 years at
8% a year, over 8 years at 10% a year. So in general,
that period of time was spent in ONR's building the
oceanographic capability. What about specific
departments? Suppose that you saw you needed a
department of chemical engineering and
oceanography someplace. Would you tend to invite
proposals of this sort to come in to encourage
departmental growth? No, I wouldn't say we didn't
do that. We may have in conversations with the
laboratory directors encouraged the buildup of
this or that or something else. But we didn't
really... We tried not to... impinge too much on
the university's prerogatives, which include
building the kind of departments they want. Yeah,
right. Did you have any ratio about which you tried
to divide funds up? Did you try to work the funds out
equally in terms of sections or in terms of
universities, or primarily you organized them
around the caliber of the proposals, or both?
Well, as in most of these programs,
It's partly trying to change the existing pattern
of support and partly continuing to support what
you supported last year. And so I
think the way we spent our money early in the game,
we spent our money by essentially discussing what
the major institutions would be doing during the
coming year and then supplying them with the funds
without too much deep review on the individual
projects. It was really block support to
institutions. And then,
that was about the time of the Mansfield Amendment
and about the time that ONR restructured their
program, got rid of the geophysics branch,
organized an ocean sciences division, that we
started doing harder and harder reviews and
building a team of experts. Up until Up until the
time that they established the Ocean Sciences
Division, there were only two oceanographers
in the geophysics branch. Artis had me as
chief oceanographer, and then we hired Don
Martineau and
I mean, I can't tell you. My memory doesn't carry
that well right now. All right, now, two comments
have appeared in the course of other interviews.
Some oceanographers have maintained that it was
better in terms of research facilities when ONR
simply gave block funds and allowed the
university itself to distribute it, like
Scripps. Others have argued that they now prefer
it the way it is now, that it's closely looked over
projects, with sort of careful review of
proposals. Now, the people who advocate the block
funds maintain that it was more experimental
then. This was a better chance for a person without
a national reputation to come into research
funds. The others maintain that now you receive
more money for your research. Do you have any
opinion one way or another on that?
Well, I suppose that
Certainly the awarding of block funds to the
institute directors gave them more flexibility
in supporting the kind of research that they
wanted to support. And in a sense, I suppose, that
provided more flexibility because there were
more people making the decisions and a broader
base. I don't think the way we're doing it now
is hampered. I don't think that the flexibility of
the way we're doing it now is hampered as much by the
administrative procedures as it is by funding. I
think if the directors, who at that time were
getting fair increases every year and building,
they had a lot of spare cash to work with. I think if
they were faced with what they've been faced with
for the past four or five or 10 years maybe, they
would have not been so flexible either. And so I
don't think it's the system that cuts down the
flexibility as much as it is the growth or collapse
of the field. Now, growth of the field. Others have
suggested that the plethora of institutions
created in the late 50s, early 60s divided the
research pie up to the extent that worthy projects
are now very difficult to get funded. Would you
agree?
I don't know. I think from IDOE's point of view, I
don't believe that's the case. It may be because of
ONR's difficulties over the past five years,
level funding, in the face of galloping
inflation, that
that's a real impact. But the establishment of
IDOE at least made funds available for big,
exciting programs to be carried out. Now, a few
comments about these, if you shall. Roger
Revelle, when did you first meet him and what sort
of impact did he have on ONR by the time you arrived?
Well, I met Roger at Scripps when I went there, but
his impact on ONR was before 1950. In fact, I think
he was either the first geophysics branch head as a
commander in the Navy. I think that's what he was.
And he essentially shaped the geophysics branch
at that time.
So I don't know what other impact he had at ONR, but
he certainly established oceanography within
the geophysics branch and left people behind who
were sympathetic to oceanography. Yeah, Tom.
Were there any oceanographers in particular who
seemed to have a national impact on ONR at this
time? That is, whose opinions were so valued that
they perhaps swayed ONR in both giving funds or
what have you? Oh, I think, as I said earlier, we
were dealing directly with the laboratory
directors and supporting them in sort of a block
basis. And certainly the laboratory directors
probably had the major impact on ONR's
oceanography program. And I would defend that
even today because our attitude then was that
What's good for the science, oceanographic
science, is good for the Navy, because the Navy
doesn't have the wisdom to know what ought to be
done in basic oceanographic research. And much of
it didn't exist in Washington. So we worked very
closely with them, and they certainly had an
impact on the shape of the program and on the kind of
work that was being supported. And that included
Roger and Columbus Islin, Fritz Kochi,
John Canone.
Why NSF? Why did you decide to separate NSF and ONR,
and why did you decide to go with NSF?
I didn't understand the first part of that.
There's evidently a decision made, and ONR
participates in it, best I can tell, for NSF to grow
and to separate from ONR. What was the basic
philosophy behind the National Science
Foundation, and why did you decide to go with NSF?
Well,
I don't think that ONR was involved in the decision
to establish the National Science Foundation. I
think some of the high people in ONR probably
encouraged it to expand the base of basic
research.
But the foundation was really established by an
act of Congress. And that was done long before I
ever thought of joining the foundation. That was
done, I
can't tell you the exact date, but in the early 50s.
And some of the
people high up in ONR did come to the foundation.
Randy Robertson is the one that comes to mind
first. But a lot of other people from ONR who had
experience in this kind of basic research
administration. My decision to come to the
foundation was
really because a number of people put the arm on me.
And these included Worth Mallon from Texas A&M,
who had been working with Jerry Van Andel and John
Ryder to hold the decade program together in its
first few months until the director could be found
for the IDOE program. And Tom Owen, who at that time
had just assumed responsibility for the research
directorate, national and international
programs, and was responsible for the IDOE
program. And I couldn't think of a good reason not
to accept it. It was a promotion, and it was a
challenge. And while I was enjoying myself
tremendously at ONR, and I hated to leave, I just
felt that I couldn't afford, I just couldn't turn
it down. What sort of new direction did you try to
bring to the foundation now that you have a new job
removed from O&R? How did you visualize its role in
the future? I didn't, you know, I was in O&R during
the planning stages of IDOE and we had some minor
input into it, although the Navy had somebody who
was responsible sort of on a full-time basis for
the planning. But I looked on it as a pork barrel,
which we could tap out of the O and R to augment our
ongoing program. And we put together some pretty
big projects that we felt justify funds from this
new source of money. But when I came over here, then
my attitude changed a little bit.
And I had no real preconceived notions about what
the IDOE program should look like. And until I
agreed to join it, I had not read very much about the
background, the documents, or anything else. And
I spent several months working with the troika
that was trying to hold it together, and reading
all the background documents, and trying to
decide what the philosophy should be, what kind of
projects we should support. and how we should
implement the program. So I didn't have any bright
ideas when I came over here.
And I think the decision was pretty well made that
we should reserve this new source of funds for
tackling some difficult problems that we had not
been able to tackle before. And
then the problem was, which, you know, which
research project should be undertaken, and how
should we deal with the whole matter of initiating
a project, reviewing it, managing it, the whole
business. And it evolved. We made a lot of mistakes
in the first year, so it evolved gradually over a
long period of time. In the first several years,
what sort of basic decision did you make, let's
say, difference in reviewing and managing than
you had at ONR in projects?
A couple of major differences. At ONR, the
procedure at that time, and still is for that
matter, is to do a review of a proposal from an
institution. with all of its components, maybe
20, 30 tasks under one proposal, with the staff.
That is, the staff, which was at that time about six
oceanographers, to go and spend three or four days
in an institution, talking to the people who had
made the proposals, and then sitting down and
making the decisions right there on which ones
they would support, at what level, and which ones
they would not support.
When I came over here, the foundation's method was
to use peer review, male review, and external
review panels. And in a way, it
gives you a broader base of advice, and you're less
susceptible to criticism. I take it you prefer
then the foundation method of reviewing
proposals.
You want to shut that off for a minute? You're
supposed to be talking too much. Where did we leave
off? I asked you, I said, I take it you prefer the way
that the foundation now reviews proposals.
Yeah, I think it's... for what we're doing i think
it's better i think onr who has the mission
orientation problem can still go ahead and run the
program that way without you know they have good
people and they support good scientists i don't
think they have any problem for us for us it's
better and uh
sort of assures that the research you're doing is
really excellent and not just the bias of one
program manager or one person. Now, while at ONR
you co-authored a pamphlet on the next 10 years of
oceanography, would you hazard to say where you
think oceanography is going to go within the next
several years? What direction will it take?
I've already done that twice. I
guess you could surely identify the major
issues that face the nation and the country over
the next 10 or 20 years with regard to the oceans.
And one of them is certainly climate. Physical
oceanography is certainly going to pay close
attention to the impact of the ocean on extended
weather forecasting, on weather, and on climate.
We're going to be concerned with the quality of the
ocean as far as man's impact on that with his own
waste products. And a lot of work is going to be done
in marine pollution and marine pollution studies
over the next five or 10 years.
We will be deeply involved in our research. And the
federal program will be equally deeply involved
in the non-living resources. The petroleum, it's
the kind of thing we're supporting, and we're only
at the beginning of it. Manganese nodules, how
they form. And in living resources, the whole
problem of intelligent management of fisheries
resources, based on the system or the ecology of
the region, rather than just a given fish or a given
species, this sort of thing.